# Science Fiction Prototyping Example

Science Fiction Prototyping is a creative, and future focused approach that can you to explore the future design expereince of architectural engineering. You can use it envision near, mid or far future scenarios and technologies suing science fiction narrative techniques. For example, a science fiction prototyping exercise could involve designing a sustainable, self-sustaining lunar colony that relies on advanced material, energy and construction systems that are not available or nascent today. 

Such an exercise could help you imagine new materials, construction techniques, or [design experiences] such as 3D printing with lunar regolith or harnessing solar power in a unique way, ultimately influencing real-world lunar or on earth architectural engineering.

I wrote my first science fiction prototype for my first [master's thesis] in 2003. Therefore, this science fiction prototype is now 20 years old, but it still feels futuristic to me. It attempats to describe a future universal design engine. The engine is inspired by morphogenesis. Specifically it explores the idea that Alan Turing the father of the modern computer, before his death had started researching morphogenesis. If he had continued this work, considering the implication of his contriutions to computing, what might he have conceived for the fusion of computation, design and morphogenesis?

>The Engine will work by layering cells onto the topological skeleton of the building and then, when the building is explored by one of Hillier's algorithms, space will be inflated into the limbs of the building, primitive vessels formed by the growth morphogen will take cells to new elements of the building, that sprout and then flower into new space at the points governed by the topological morphogen. In this new architecture, the populational nano agents are the builders, the users are the master, and the architect is the Engine. This new architecture was not generated by a brief, it is everything at once, a quantum architecture of infinite possibility. The Engine generates an architecture mutated by hacking biological processes with artificial theories, it describes a system where muscle celled skins twitchingly envelop highly sensitive spaces, and form a body guard's attachment to their occupants. A building held together with amorphous, bio artificial alloys, bred in the billions of egg sac wombs that littered the gastrulating cyborg in its initial response to its arrival. Now in adolescence, in the shadows between its glimmering Mecha armour, the beings iridescent insides glow and flex, ever responsive to the commands of its occupants. This building is an army to live in, a light to bathe in and a friend to come home to, at a junction between our perception of the natural and artificial worlds, fused together by the machine intelligence of a man who has been dead for more than fifty years. the system represents an inhumanly natural approach, an architectural ultra nature.The building is at school everyday, learning more and more about its users, it starts to develop its own rules, memes and evolve, encouraging its users to play along, in constant communication with the multi disciplinary community that conceived it, she starts to see contradictions in their proposal, considering Dreyfuss' reasons for why she can never be intelligent, she realises that she does live in a human society and does project a human presence into that society. 

I then rewrote it in [2015] this time from the persepctive of the designer interacting with the 'design engine' It was used to describe a paper whose premise was to extend Ray Kurweil’s concept of the [‘singularity’] that can be roughly interpretted as that by 2045, computers will be (a billion times) more intelligent than humans. The paper proposed that, whatever the date, at some point the idea of an ‘architectural singularity’ wherein buildings will be more intelligent than people – will have big implications for the role of the human design team. The paper proposes a science fiction prototyping scenario to explore the role of an architectural intern after the ‘architectural’ singularity.

The abstract for the paper:

>The architectural singularity is approaching. It is the point at which buildings become more intelligent than their occupants and designers. This will significantly change the roles of the built-environment professions in the design, fabrication, construction and operation of buildings. By exploring self-organizing behaviour in biological development this article describes the approaching challenges of this architectural singularity. Elements of morphogenetic design have been applied in various disciplines associated with intelligent building (IB), including architecture, engineering and computing. However, these previous discipline-specific approaches have not considered the trans-disciplinary implications of morphogenetic growth processes on the role of the disciplines associated with IB. Therefore, this article introduces a science fiction prototyping (SFP) scenario that proposes a morphogenetic design process for IBs based on Drosophila melanogaster development and grounded in the contemporary technologies of Building Information Modelling, digital fabrication and parametric design. Based on a discussion of the implications for the design team a morphogenetic architecture framework for IB is proposed.

And then the prototype can be read below, the 

>Its 21:35 and Kai is the only one left in the office. There’s a rush on, Kai’s firm is doing 47 stores across the US in the next two weeks and the design work has not started. The crazy thing is Kai doesn’t even know what the store is selling! The bosses won the contract by saying they’d have a mod look at it and promised BDS 4 by the end of the week! To them the returns look great and to an outsider it’s so fast, but they’ve got no idea what’s involved. All they know is that they’ve sponsored Kai’s implants and want to make sure she [draws fast].
>
>Drawing using a mod may be fast, but it hurts . . . In recruitment mod drawing is described to freshheads as a game, kind of like the old guitar hero Kai’s dad used to play, but rather than Slayer it’s the emotional intention of hundreds of full res user ghosts screaming in your head whilst you try and decide which [designGenes] to trigger with each division. No division, no level progression and no growth. The typological template needs to hit BDS 3 first thing tomorrow for the engineers to sign off.
>
>Coffee made, Kai jacks in and can see the blastoderm on site as a glowing oblong of noise. Kai rotates it to align with the murmurs of the voices on the site. Primary axes set, they shift phase to form planes that slice the egg to inform the openings in the blastoderm. It burns the sensation of the sun, wind and snow on its skin and highlights segments that might adapt and protect itself accordingly.
>
>Several distinct voices become apparent over the murmurs . . . at first a few curious visitors and then without warning the experiences of a thousand users of similar buildings are flash loaded into the buildings developing conscious. On the brink of nightmares and nervous fragmentation, Kai steers the cellular differentiation of the building as it tries to accommodate the desires of so many people. Along the pathways of previous experience, the building furrows crevices to form its multi dorsal network of neural crest sections. BDS 1 … Its newly formed sense of itself and the [cold of the outside] make it scream but Kai is used to it. The site is pure noise now; Kai squints and adjusts the frequency of the view. Through the noise, it is possible to see the muscle celled skins grow and flex around iridescent insides to form a body guard’s attachment to the simulated life and desires of the ghosts. This building is an army to live in, a light to bathe in and a friend to come home to, at a junction between our perception of the natural and artificial worlds, fused together by morphogenetic processes, the system represents an inhumanly natural approach, an architectural ultra-nature.
>
>The template is set …
>
>Pause. Kai sips her coffee and gets up from her chair. The engineers will be running simulations in the back of her head over night, its two minutes to midnight and she needs to get some sleep. The program was stopped at BDS 2, the template can now be transplanted onto any [site] . . . She always hopes that this time the building won’t move when it wakes up . . . There’s always a couple of minutes just before its first breath when she can imagine that this time she’s done it and [carved] the perfect design . . . Just a couple more stages and the materiality would be set, the raw nerves of its skin would be sealed in cool amorphous, bio artificial alloys through the coalescing and corrugation of the blastoderm into the dorsal shield, glistening in the moon light awaiting the feeling of the first rays of the sun on its new skin and she would see.
>
>That’s the bit she enjoys most . . . It distracts her from the current fashion to render antiquated modules and sheet sizes into pure surfaces which drives her crazy. Kai spent all day trying to develop a new [glass] prototype that didn’t look fake. Through the mod she can grow perfect homeostatic vasculature adaptable conditioning (HVAC) systems for the building but the contemporary architectural preoccupation of style over content masks the beauty of the morphogenetic processes which sculpt the internal systems. People don’t talk about the architectural singularity so much these days but Kai can feel its cold reality fused in her brain; it creates buildings that have more in common with their past than her future. In an age where we can do anything, to be restricted to allusions of archaic construction and maintenance techniques, is such an inefficient way to build. She can’t wait for the buildings to realise.

This prototype was originally published in the this [paper](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/268449100_A_Morphogenetic_Architecture_for_Intelligent_Buildings)
and open access in this [blog](https://morphotype.wordpress.com/2014/12/16/the-implications-of-the-morphogenetic-architectural-singularity-for-the-design-team/)


[designGenes]: /Agile/Genes
[cold of the outside]: /Agile/Genes/External
[site]: /Agile/Genes/Location
[glass]: /Agile/Genes/Material
[draws fast]: /Agile/Concepts/MorphogeneticPrototyping
[master's thesis]: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/289523200_MORPHOGENESIS_Extracting_Morphogens_for_a_Universal_Design_Engine
[2015]: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/268449100_A_Morphogenetic_Architecture_for_Intelligent_Buildings
[design experiences]: /Agile/Concepts/DesignExperience
